# Fusion isn't so hard

I saw somebody [post][] about a kid achieving nuclear fusion at home,
and I was sure it was fake news. It referenced [fusor.net][], which
also looks fake. But the concept, at least, is real!
([WikiPedia][]/[IEEE][]) How cool! For a couple thousand dollars or
so, you can make a fusion reactor in your house, on a desk! I feel
like this should be more widely known.

[post]: https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/amp/news/2020/10/middle-school-student-achieved-nuclear-fusion-in-his-family-playroom-631163
[fusor.net]: https://fusor.net/
[WikiPedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fusor
[IEEE]: https://spectrum.ieee.org/energy/nuclear/fusion-on-a-budget

You mostly hear about fusion in stars, which makes it seem... big. And
far away. Knowing you can do it as a hobbyist if you feel like makes
it seem so much more approachable! Together with the naturally
occurring fission [reactors][], there are cool non-bomb, non-star
examples of both fission and fusion. Nice!

[reactors]: https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/natures-nuclear-reactors-the-2-billion-year-old-natural-fission-reactors-in-gabon-western-africa/

Also did you know you can buy [deuterium][]? I think you can probably
get it as a gas, but you can also just buy yourself some heavy water
if you want! It's just water, but with extra neutrons on the hydrogen!
How cool!

[deuterium]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deuterium

The good and bad of home fusion is that it's just a _little_ bit of
fusion, and it takes a lot more energy to make it happen than you get
out. So it doesn't blow up, and the extra radioactivity won't kill you
very fast. As far as I can tell, these fusor devices are in a weird
zone of not being regulated, I think, because they're hard enough to
make and not quite dangerous enough to be a big risk.

I think it'd be a great thing to see more fusors in children's museums
(and other science museums). They don't have to turn it on; it'd just
be a cool exhibit to demonstrate that it's so possible.
